Now what do you think happens if I set condition to one, instead of false or true?
What do you think we'll see if I hit run? We get executed,
so we're reaching this part.
The reason for this is that one is interpreted as true
and on the other hand zero, as you will see if I hit run, is interpreted as false.
That's common in a lot of languages and Javascript is kind of casting your value here, 0 or 1 into
a boolean,
so it's translating it into true or false.
Now what happens if I set condition to two?
Let's see what happens if I hit run. Well we also get executed,
so two also gets interpreted as true here but this is a bit intriguing to be honest.
Let me add a console log statement and print something else. I want to print if one equals true,
so if I run this, we get executed and then we get true,
so one equals true
and if I add one extra equal sign, we get false of course because this is a boolean and this is a number
.
What happens if I check if two equals true?
You see we get false but here, if we set it to two, this gets executed nonetheless
even though this seems to be not equal to true. So 2 is not equal to true, whilst one was equal to true
but
if we set the condition here to two, it somehow still is interpreted as being true even though we
just checked that this is not the case.
What's happening here?
Well what's happening here is, it's working the other way around,
zero is equal to false and therefore Javascript will treat everything not being equal to zero
as fulfilling this if condition.
So basically two is not the same as true but it's enough to fulfill this condition, only if we set this
to zero
are we explicitly telling Javascript that this is false,
so everything besides zero will be interpreted as true, even though technically only one is equal to true,
the
rest is only treated as such but it's not the same.
That is important to understand when working with these numbers as booleans, only 0 and 1 can be cast
into booleans,
the rest is only treated as true,
that is really important to understand.
So what if I'm assigning this to a negative value of -1?
It's still getting executed,
so negative values are treated as true as well
and that is important to understand and be aware of.
So I'll get rid of this
but what happens if I set this equal to
some text and now I'm checking condition which is text.
What do you think we'll now see?
We still get executed, so text,
a string, is also interpreted as true
and what happens if I set this to false?
Still, any text is interpreted as true.
And what if I set this equal to null,
what do you think we'll see now if I hit run?
Well now we get to not executed,
so null is treated like false and this is an important behavior because in more complex applications, you'll
often have the case that you want to check if a certain variable is set or if a certain variable is
not null.
For example if you're reaching out to some kind of server and you get back the answers sometimes
in the future but you are using the variable before having your answer,
you might want to check if it is actually set and not execute any code
if it is not set, so if it is null and therefore it's important that null is treated like false. So that
was quite a lot of talking about a
generally simple statement but it is key to understand what is interpreted as true and false because
otherwise you will run into nasty bugs
when you try to do something and suddenly, things are treated as true or false
even though you did not expect that to happen.